---
layout: post
title: Gem Files

Ruby Gems are a way of distributing open source libraries of code, which are then installed on a local machine.  Each gem has a name, version, and platform.  Sinatra and Rails are two well known gems.

The structure of a gem is normally the following.

1) A lib folder containing code.

2) A spec folder containing tests

3) A build automation file known as a Rakefile

4) README documentation

5) A 'gemspec' file containing information about the gem, such as author, version number and other details.

While gems are a very useful tool and essential in many cases, their use requires careful consideration, as the user is relying on code created elsewhere to function as expected, which may not always be the case, and some can be poorly written, going against good practices such as the SOLID principles.

It is also important to avoid dependency conflicts by using bundler ( a gem itself ) which can occur when there are multiple versions of a piece of software on the machine.  Each gem is listed in a 'Gemfile' within the project directory, and the exact version can be specified.  Once the Gemfile is created, the command bundle install is given on the command line, at which point bundler retrieves the correct versions of gems needed, satisfying the needs of the multiple libraries

Bundler also creates a Gemfile.lock which ensures that in the future what is being used locally is also what is used in production

When used within projects, Gems are 'required'. 

```
require 'aws/s3' # the S3 gem
```
